---
title: Poetry and Madness home
layout: base
date: 2024-12-02
---

# Poetry and Madness: The Life and Legacy of Friedrich Hölderlin

{% include figure.html
  class="right"
  width="33%"
  caption="1792 portrait of Friedrich Hölderlin by Franz Karl Hiemer"
  image-path="/assets/images/friedrich-holderlin-portrait-colorized-pencil-drawing-by-franz-karl-hiemer-1792.jpg"
%}

Friedrich Hölderlin was a poet and intellectual born in Lauffen am Neckar, then part of the Holy Roman Empire, in 1770. Having grown up in a middle class clerical family and been trained to enter the Lutheran ministry, Hölderlin’s life was fundamentally shaped by his academic and literary background. In the academic system of the late Holy Roman Empire, instructors taught students the Christian theology that had inspired the medieval universities of Germany at the same time that they imparted to them an admiration for the Ancient Greeks as the height of culture. Looking at the world around them, Hölderlin and his fellow students could see both the continuity of a system based on the authority of inherited titles and hierarchical personal obligations which had characterized the Holy Roman Empire since the Middle Ages and the rise of a commercial and literary culture in the cities. Society seemed to be at a crossroads, and many German intellectuals were interested in combating rural, medieval traditions with Enlightenment ideals of a rational, lawful, and efficiently run society.

In the world of the late Holy Roman Empire of the 18th century, the greatest force of change was government efforts in constructing a professional bureaucracy. Instead of a system based on personal obligation, which could be unpredictable in quality and outcome, princes began to support the creation of a system for managing their funds as public resources to organize their territories according to consistent, standard rules. As society was becoming increasingly commercial, and money transactions became more common, princes sought to keep their finances in order through this system of careful management. As King of Prussia from 1740 to 1786, Friedrich the Great innovated a model of rule which combined expanding the bureaucracy at the same time as sponsoring literature and the arts. Under the reign of Friedrich and the princes who adopted him as their model, the professions began to become an important part of political life and culture. 

Amidst this bureaucratization of society, middle class professionals sought to expand the scope of their authority. They argued that expertise was the measure of qualification rather than religious devotion or noble descent. They invoked Enlightenment ideas of rationality and attacks on superstition in a competition with the priesthood and nobility for jurisdiction over and cultural recognition from peasants. They argued that peasant religiosity often veered into delusions and mental illness, and that the spiritual malaise of peasants ought to be treated by middle class professionals known as alienists instead of by priests. Though the alienists depicted their profession as treating the whole person, including their soul, they also subscribed to theological rationalism and criticized the priesthood for limiting the spread of Enlightenment rationality with their arbitrary authority and use of fear tactics like the threat of eternal damnation. These campaigns against rural superstition came at a time when rural society had been thrown into disarray by commercialization. Peasants and their families often turned to rural alienists for help, though many resisted the authority of medical experts through non-cooperation when they tried to change their religious beliefs. 

Just as German peasants defended their conviction in spirituality, many intellectuals began to call for a spiritual revival of what they considered the excessively impersonal society of commerce and bureaucracy. This rejection of the direction that German society had begun heading inspired the rise of Romanticism by the late 1700s. Romantics like Novalis believed that a person’s inner life offered a respite from a harsh outer world. Imagining that humanity had originally been united to the wholesome embrace of nature, they sought to recover this original fullness of life through poetry, literature, music, and visual art. Many of them successfully acquired academic positions in the university system and even achieved prominence through the sponsorship of princes and kings. Though Friedrich Hölderlin did not reach the very heights of prominence, he made his way into the literary world of German academia and joined the Romantic movement.

Hölderlin’s Romantic idealism reinforced his rebelliousness just as his rebelliousness reinforced his Romanticism. He became involved with sympathizers to the French Revolution while at Tübingen University in the 1790s. His friends numbered among those who would become the most famous and influential of the German academic intelligentsia in the future, including the philosophers Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. They believed that the French Revolution marked the rebirth of Ancient Greek democracy and the political realization of Christian spiritual principles. For Hölderlin, these political principles were part and parcel with personal conduct. While working as a tutor, he fell in love with his employer’s wife, Susette Gontard. Drawing from his admiration for Greek art, he addressed her in his poems as the artistic muse “Diotima.” 

After the Napoleonic Wars drove most Germans to defend themselves from the French invaders, the prospects of a French-style revolution in Germany seemed to have disappeared. A number of intellectuals, Hölderlin included, had no choice but to flee from the carnage wreaked by the French invaders that some had expected to greet as liberators. While many intellectuals decided to make do with their situation and pursue professional careers in the growing professional bureaucracy of the German principalities, the most uncompromising of the revolutionary intellectuals were wracked with disappointment and could not make peace with the new order either personally or on principle. Hölderlin was one of these people who were left behind by the times. In 1799, Gontard, who had inspired so much of his work, gently ended their relationship. In a final letter to her, Hölderlin wrote “I have already had the thought we might be able to live from renunciation, as if it might perhaps give us strength if once and for all we said goodbye to hope.” 

In the early years of the 19th century, local authorities in Germany worked to re-establish order. They especially sought to settle accounts with those they perceived as traitors. In 1805, Tübingen authorities put Hölderlin’s friend, Isaac von Sinclair, on trial under the accusation that he had committed treason by planning a revolution. Hölderlin was slated to stand trial for treason as well for his involvement in Sinclair’s revolutionary secret society, but the authorities declared him mentally unfit and released him. In 1806, he was admitted to the University Hospital Tübingen to be treated for madness by the medical doctor and alienist Johann Heinrich Ferdinand von Autenrieth. Autenrieth released him as incurable in 1807. A carpenter named Ernest Zimmer, an admirer of Hölderlin’s poetry, brought him under his family’s care. From that year until his death in 1843, Hölderlin lived in a tower overlooking the Neckar River. There, students from Tübingen University and admirers of his poetry freely visited him, though he was usually non-responsive to them.

Until his death in 1843, Hölderlin continued to write poetry which accorded with the Romantic ideals of his youth. His lack of a public audience did not dissuade him, and the privateness of his literary production gave him space to write his last poems with a highly complex and innovative use of language, rhythm, and imagery. His strange use of the German language led many of his admirers to dismiss his late poetry as the inferior product of a madman. Though he passed away in obscurity, his writing found new life through the admiration of German intellectuals at the turn of the 19th century. His reception was shaped by his reputation as a madman, which had inspired psychiatrists working in the then-new national clinical system to write about him and his late work as a case study in mental illness. Since he began to live with the Zimmers, Hölderlin’s poetry and his madness have been intimately linked in his legacy. Intellectuals debated the significance of Hölderlin as both a poet and a madman. In dialogue with each other, the commentators contended the relationship of each aspect of Hölderlin to the other into a debate that continues into the present. 

If you're brand new, jump into our set of guides and [get started](guides/getting-started)!
